Shelby County, Alabama, was a covered jurisdiction under the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended in
2006. As such, all voting changes in the county had to be precleared by either the attorney general of the United
States or federal judges on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. In 2010, county officials filed a lawsuit
against Attorney General Eric Holder, claiming that the preclearance formula (Section 4) and requirements (Section
5) of the Voting Rights Act were unconstitutional. A federal district court rejected that claim, as did the Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia. Shelby County appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
The Supreme Court by a 5–4 vote declared unconstitutional the preclearance formula in Section 4 of the
Voting Rights Act. Chief Justice Roberts’ majority opinion asserted that the formula was based on outdated evidence
inconsistent with contemporary voting rights practices. Why did he reach that conclusion? Why did Justice
Ginsburg disagree? Under the Fifteenth Amendment, what are the respective roles of the Congress and the judiciary
when determining whether a sufficient factual basis supports the ongoing need for the Section 4 formula? The chief
justice paid much attention to federalism principles, most notably the principle of “equal sovereignty.” Justice
Ginsburg, by comparison, discussed standards under the Civil War Amendments. What explains the different
constitutional focus of each opinion? How would you integrate federalism and the post–Civil War Amendments?
Both opinions commented on the status of voting discrimination in the contemporary United States. Who painted
the more accurate picture? How do these pictures influence your attitude toward the case? Does Shelby County in
practice sound the death knell for preclearance? Is preclearance as well as the specific formula Congress used a relic
of the past or a vital means for preventing racial discrimination in voting and elections?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court.
. . . .
. . . . The Federal Government does not have a general right to review and veto state enactments
before they go into effect. A proposal to grant such authority to “negative” state laws was considered at
the Constitutional Convention, but rejected in favor of allowing state laws to take effect, subject to later
challenge under the Supremacy Clause.
Outside the strictures of the Supremacy Clause, States retain broad autonomy in structuring their
governments and pursuing legislative objectives. Indeed, the Constitution provides that all powers not
specifically granted to the Federal Government are reserved to the States or citizens. This “allocation of
powers in our federal system preserves the integrity, dignity, and residual sovereignty of the States.” But
the federal balance “is not just an end in itself: Rather, federalism secures to citizens the liberties that
derive from the diffusion of sovereign power.”
. . . .
Not only do States retain sovereignty under the Constitution, there is also a “fundamental
principle of equal sovereignty” among the States. Over a hundred years ago, this Court explained that
our Nation “was and is a union of States, equal in power, dignity and authority.” Coyle v. Smith (1911).
Indeed, “the constitutional equality of the States is essential to the harmonious operation of the scheme
upon which the Republic was organized.” . . .
